Introduction

C++ is a high-level, general-purpose programming language developed by Bjarne Stroustrup in 1983 as an extension of C.

It is widely used for system programming, game development, competitive programming, and more.



---

2. Key Features

1. Object-Oriented Programming (OOP):

C++ introduces OOP concepts like classes, objects, inheritance, polymorphism, encapsulation, and abstraction.



2. Multi-Paradigm:

Supports procedural, functional, and object-oriented programming.



3. Low-Level Memory Control:

Direct access to memory through pointers.



4. Standard Template Library (STL):

Predefined classes and functions for data structures (e.g., vectors, stacks) and algorithms (e.g., sorting, searching).



5. High Performance:

Faster execution due to compiled nature and low-level memory manipulation.



6. Portability:

Code can run on multiple platforms with minimal changes.



7. Rich Library Support:

Includes libraries for various functionalities (e.g., I/O, threading, algorithms).





---

3. Syntax and Language Elements

Basic Structure:

#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

int main() {
    cout << "Hello, World!" << endl;
    return 0;
}

Core Concepts:

Data Types: int, float, double, char, bool

Control Structures: if-else, loops (for, while, do-while)

Functions: User-defined and inline functions

Classes and Objects

File Handling

Exception Handling




---

4. OOP Principles

1. Classes and Objects:

A class defines a blueprint, and objects are instances of classes.



2. Inheritance:

Enables code reuse (e.g., single, multiple, hierarchical inheritance).



3. Polymorphism:

Compile-time (function overloading) and run-time (virtual functions).



4. Encapsulation:

Bundling data and methods in a class.



5. Abstraction:

Hiding implementation details and exposing only essential information.





---

5. Standard Template Library (STL)

Provides ready-to-use classes and functions.

Components:

1. Containers: Vectors, lists, queues, stacks, sets, maps


2. Algorithms: Sort, search, reverse, find


3. Iterators: Pointers-like objects to traverse containers.





---

6. Applications

1. System Programming:

Operating systems, embedded systems



2. Game Development:

Game engines like Unreal Engine use C++.



3. Competitive Programming:

STL makes it a preferred language for coding competitions.



4. Desktop Applications:

GUI applications (e.g., Adobe Photoshop).



5. Database Management:

Backend processing and database systems.



6. Scientific Computing:

Simulations, mathematical computations.





---

7. Advantages

High performance

Rich libraries and frameworks

Flexibility and control over hardware

Compatibility with C language



---

8. Limitations

Steep learning curve for beginners.

Manual memory management (prone to memory leaks).

Less support for modern web and mobile development compared to languages like Python or JavaScript.
